docs/costs.md, before:

---
id: costs
title: Costs
slug: /costs
---

Every operator has a cost associated with it. Additionally, there can be a separate cost dependent on the number of arguments or bytes used when calling it.

At some point, the program will terminate if it surpasses the cost limit. Additionally, if you deploy your program as a puzzle on the Chia blockchain, it can have higher fees associated with it based on the cost.

:::info

The maximum cost per block is 11,000,000,000. Keep this in mind as you write your Chialisp programs.

:::

## Cost Table {#table}

| Operator                 | Base    | Argument | Byte                                                                                        |
| ------------------------ | ------- | -------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| f - _first_              | 30      | 0        | 0                                                                                           |
| i - _if_                 | 33      | 0        | 0                                                                                           |
| c - _cons_               | 50      | 0        | 0                                                                                           |
| r - _rest_               | 30      | 0        | 0                                                                                           |
| l - _list predicate_     | 19      | 0        | 0                                                                                           |
| q - _quote_              | 20      | 0        | 0                                                                                           |
| a - _apply_              | 90      | 0        | 0                                                                                           |
| =                        | 117     | 0        | 1                                                                                           |
| +                        | 99      | 320      | 3                                                                                           |
| -                        | 99      | 320      | 3                                                                                           |
| \*                       | 92      | 885      | [Info](https://github.com/Chia-Network/clvm_tools/blob/main/costs/README.md#multiplication) |
| /                        | 988     | 0        | 4                                                                                           |
| logand                   | 100     | 264      | 3                                                                                           |
| logior                   | 100     | 264      | 3                                                                                           |
| logxor                   | 100     | 264      | 3                                                                                           |
| lognot                   | 331     | 0        | 3                                                                                           |
| >                        | 498     | 0        | 2                                                                                           |
| >s                       | 117     | 0        | 1                                                                                           |
| strlen                   | 173     | 0        | 1                                                                                           |
| concat                   | 142     | 135      | 3                                                                                           |
| divmod                   | 1116    | 0        | 6                                                                                           |
| sha256                   | 87      | 134      | 2                                                                                           |
| ash - _arithmetic shift_ | 596     | 0        | 3                                                                                           |
| lsh - _logical shift_    | 277     | 0        | 3                                                                                           |
| not                      | 200     | 300      | 0                                                                                           |
| any                      | 200     | 300      | 0                                                                                           |
| all                      | 200     | 300      | 0                                                                                           |
| point_add                | 101094  | 1343980  | 0                                                                                           |
| pubkey_for_exp           | 1325730 | 0        | 38                                                                                          |

## Conditions

More information on the costs associated with conditions can be found on the [Conditions page](https://docs.chia.net/conditions#costs) of the Chia docs.

Commit message:

Begin expansion of costs section

docs/costs.md, after:

---
id: costs
title: Costs
slug: /costs
---

Every operator has a cost associated with it. Additionally, there can be a separate cost dependent on the number of arguments or bytes used when calling it.

At some point, the program will terminate if it surpasses the cost limit. Additionally, if you deploy your program as a puzzle on the Chia blockchain, it can have higher fees associated with it based on the cost.

:::info
The maximum cost per block is 11,000,000,000 (11 billion), which is equivalent to around 400 KB of space. Keep this in mind as you write your Chialisp programs.

You can use the following commands to check the cost while compiling and running programs:

```bash
run --cost "<Chialisp>"
brun --cost "<Compiled CLVM>" "<Environment>"
```

Additionally, each byte of data added to a block has a cost of 12,000.
:::

## Cost Table {#table}

| Operator                 | Base    | Argument | Byte                                                                                        |
| ------------------------ | ------- | -------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| f - _first_              | 30      | 0        | 0                                                                                           |
| i - _if_                 | 33      | 0        | 0                                                                                           |
| c - _cons_               | 50      | 0        | 0                                                                                           |
| r - _rest_               | 30      | 0        | 0                                                                                           |
| l - _list predicate_     | 19      | 0        | 0                                                                                           |
| q - _quote_              | 20      | 0        | 0                                                                                           |
| a - _apply_              | 90      | 0        | 0                                                                                           |
| =                        | 117     | 0        | 1                                                                                           |
| +                        | 99      | 320      | 3                                                                                           |
| -                        | 99      | 320      | 3                                                                                           |
| \*                       | 92      | 885      | [Info](https://github.com/Chia-Network/clvm_tools/blob/main/costs/README.md#multiplication) |
| /                        | 988     | 0        | 4                                                                                           |
| logand                   | 100     | 264      | 3                                                                                           |
| logior                   | 100     | 264      | 3                                                                                           |
| logxor                   | 100     | 264      | 3                                                                                           |
| lognot                   | 331     | 0        | 3                                                                                           |
| >                        | 498     | 0        | 2                                                                                           |
| >s                       | 117     | 0        | 1                                                                                           |
| strlen                   | 173     | 0        | 1                                                                                           |
| concat                   | 142     | 135      | 3                                                                                           |
| divmod                   | 1116    | 0        | 6                                                                                           |
| sha256                   | 87      | 134      | 2                                                                                           |
| ash - _arithmetic shift_ | 596     | 0        | 3                                                                                           |
| lsh - _logical shift_    | 277     | 0        | 3                                                                                           |
| not                      | 200     | 300      | 0                                                                                           |
| any                      | 200     | 300      | 0                                                                                           |
| all                      | 200     | 300      | 0                                                                                           |
| point_add                | 101094  | 1343980  | 0                                                                                           |
| pubkey_for_exp           | 1325730 | 0        | 38                                                                                          |

## Additional Costs

There is a base cost of 1 for every call to an operator. This is due to the processing time of steps taken internally to call the operator.

Additionally, there is a cost of 10 per byte of memory allocated in the return value of an operator. This excludes the boolean values 0 and 1, which are free.

## Conditions

More information on the costs associated with conditions can be found on the [Conditions page](https://docs.chia.net/conditions#costs) of the Chia docs.
